What the administration has done is
replace Nicholas Maduro, one repressive
dictator, with another repressive
dictator. There are a lot of unanswered
questions. Jean Shaheen, long-erving US
senator, [music] and a Democrat at the
crossroads of arguments over foreign
affairs, the federal budget, and within
her own party. But I wonder how alive
you are to people's disappointment,
anger even. I'll tell you, I deal with
it every day. What I say to my
Democratic friends is, "Boy, you better
get engaged. If you don't like what's
going on in this country, you need to
get busy."
From Bloomberg Weekend, [music]
this is the Michelle Hussein Show.
Amid this dramatic and uncertain time in
world news, our latest conversation is
with someone who's watching geopolitics
and American politics from a key
position on Capitol Hill. It's Senator
Gene Shaheen who served in Congress for
the last 17 years. Today, she is the
ranking member on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, which means she's
the most senior Democrat there. and
she's traveling to Denmark to try and
smooth waters after President Trump's
renewed threats over Greenland. At home,
she's also been part of the debate on
the federal budget. She was one of the
few Democrats who worked with
Republicans to bring the shutdown of the
federal government to an end last year.
But there is a new deadline on the
federal budget looming at the end of
this month. As it happens, her
compromise then with Republicans put her
at odds with her own daughter Stephanie
Shaheen, who is herself running for a
congressional seat in the midterms this
November. So all of that, the
geopolitics, the domestic American
political situation and the family side
is part of our conversation in this
episode with Senator Jean Shaheen of New
Hampshire.
Can I begin by asking you what is most
on your mind as you look around your
country and around the world?
>> Well, I just came from a briefing with
the Armed Services Committee on the
operation in Venezuela. So, there's a
lot of concern about that. But that
operation has really raised concerns
about what's happening with our allies
and partners around the world. And that
I think is what I am most concerned
about right now is ensuring that the
actions of this administration don't
undermine our partnerships around the
world because they have been so critical
to America's national security, to our
strength, and to um the international
world order.
>> And I know that you're heading to
Denmark. So is therefore the foremost on
your mind based on what you've just said
about Greenland and how the
administration's been speaking about
Greenland?
>> Well, also the potential impact on NATO.
Um I co-chair along with um Republican
Tom Tillis the Senate NATO observer
group and we pay very close attention to
the impact on NATO of American policy
and of policies from the other NATO
countries and there is I think very real
concern about the potential impact on
NATO. Um also Denmark and Greenland
share our values. They've been our
allies since um before World War II and
Denmark has always been there in support
of the United States. And what we've
heard from the Danes and from um the
Greenlanders has been anything the
United States is interested in doing in
Greenland, they would be happy to
partner with us on. We've had a treaty
with Greenland since 1951 that allows us
to have bases there. In fact, we had 17
um at the end of the Cold War and we've
actually closed 16 of those. So, I don't
think there is any concern on the part
of um our allies Denmark and Greenland
about partnering with the United States
and that's the route we should be
taking. It should be diplomatic. We
should be engaging in conversations if
there is an interest on the part of this
administration in additional operations
there. So is your major concern then
about the actions of your own
government? Are you taking the White
House seriously when it says that
military action is not out of the
question against Greenland?
>> Well, I hope that that's just rhetoric
from the president, but we don't know.
And in fact, the rhetoric itself raises
real concerns. And I've heard from our
European allies about the concerns that
are raised by the president's comments.
So, I think it's important for us, we
have a bipartisan delegation that's
going to go to Copenhagen. Um, we will
have a chance to listen to those
concerns. We'll have a chance to respond
and to think about how we move forward
together.
>> The thing is though, Senator, what can
you do as a congressional delegation or
indeed as Congress unless you detect
that there are enough Republican
senators who feel as strongly as you do
on this?
>> Well, we can continue to raise the
issue. Um, after the president's
statements, Senator Tillis and I did a
bipartisan statement on behalf of the
Senate NATO observer group where we
pointed out um the concerns about what
the president was proposing um the
potential impact on NATO and we need to
continue to do that.
>> Has NATO already been irreparably
damaged in the sense that it is
unprecedented for one NATO ally to
threaten the use of force against
another? No, I don't think so. Um, we
have a very strong um NATO alliance. We
have all agreed that we were going to
invest 5% of our GDP on defense in ways
that strengthen the NATO alliance and
better position us to address our
adversaries. And I think what we're
hearing in Congress is um a response to
the administration's comments that are
helpful for our allies.
>> You said that the briefing that you've
just been to was about Venezuela
and I wonder how much of this talk on
Greenland about the possibility of
military strikes on Iran. How much of
that is because the administration is
emboldened by
what it's done to Nicholas Maduro?
>> Oh, I don't know. I'm not sure President
Trump needs anything to embolden him.
So, um, it it's not clear. What I what I
do think is a concern is that one of the
rationale that the administration has
given for going into Venezuela was to
address the footholds that China, Russia
and um Iran have had in Venezuela for
other operations throughout the
hemisphere and the concerns that that
raises for America's national security.
And what I'm concerned about is that
while that has been a successful
operation and has given us an
opportunity to address some of those um
inroads that our adversaries have made
in Venezuela and in Latin America that
the president's statements actually
undermine those efforts because of what
he said about Greenland and insults to
our allies. But help me understand then
whether you got any more clarity out of
the briefing you had on Venezuela. Like
on this question of the extent of the
United States current involvement in the
day-to-day running of Venezuela, we had
the president saying the US is going to
run Venezuela and then we had Marco
Rubio having to roll back from that.
>> Well, I can't give you any insights from
that briefing because it was classified
unfortunately. But what we have heard is
public statements as you point out that
um suggests that when the president says
run Venezuela, it doesn't actually mean
that there are American officials in the
country.
>> And I totally understand of course that
you can't share what you've been told on
a classified basis. But did you end that
briefing with more or less concern about
Venezuela?
>> Well, it was more about the military
operation. So that's not exactly the
question that I had as the result of
this briefing, but I think there are a
lot of unanswered questions about
America's role in Venezuela going
forward, about the the need to maintain
a flotillaa off the coast of Venezuela,
if we're going to interdict um oil
that's coming out of there that's going
into the shadow fleet, which I think is
a very real concern um not just for
America, but for other western
countries. As we look at the the ability
of Russia to continue to fuel its war in
Ukraine, as we look at China and the
activities that they're engaging around
the world, um we all have an interest in
trying to shut down that shadow fleet.
But it does mean that there are costs
involved to the United States. Um, for
my constituents in the state of New
Hampshire, uh, [clears throat] they're
very worried about the cost of living
here, about the cost of groceries and
power and heating. It's, uh, in the
middle of winter in New Hampshire right
now. And so for any dollars that we're
spending in the Caribbean, the president
and the administration are not focused
on the domestic concerns in the United
States. Certainly, the potential for
escalation is a concern. We have about
20% of our um ships in the Caribbean
right now. We have 15,000
men and women in our military. Anytime
we have that many people in an area of
operation, there's the potential for
escalation, particularly given what's
happening in Venezuela because what the
administration has done is replace uh
Nicholas Maduro, one repressive
dictator, with another repressive
dictator. And while I appreciate the
need to try and avoid some of the
mistakes that the United States made
when we went into Iraq, I think we need
to see some um goals and objectives, a
timeline for what's going to happen, a
focus on democratic elections. And we
haven't seen any of that yet from the
administration.
>> There's a real complexity in that, isn't
there? because I'm sure you'd be
concerned,
if not alarmed, at the idea of complete
regime change and what that would mean
for America's commitment, whether
financial or military. But you're
clearly uncomfortable with the state of
affairs involving Deli Rodriguez, too.
>> Well, because we haven't gotten answers
to a lot of questions um that have been
raised about that. And is that concern
shared with Republican colleagues, at
least some of them, because there has
been this quite striking move where
Republican senators have been prepared
to say that they'd like the
administration to have to get
congressional approval before taking
further military action on Venezuela. Do
you think there might be more
Republicans that join those already
moving on that front? I doubt that we
will see more join in a vote, but
certainly if you talk to people behind
closed doors, there are a lot of
concerns that are being raised.
>> This was an administration that came to
powers saying, you know, there's going
to be no more foreign wars. And we've
started the year with not only threats,
but also the use of American military
might. Well, I certainly think for those
people who are up for reelection this
year, they recognize that there are a
lot of concerns among constituents about
the direction that the administration is
taking and the reversal of the promise
not to engage in foreign wars or
neverending wars.
>> Yeah. Which means we should talk about
Iran, a fastmoving situation as you and
I are speaking right now. President
Trump has said that help is on the way
for Iranians who are protesting. What do
you think he means by that?
>> It's not clear yet. I think um he has
talked about putting tariffs on
countries that aid Iran. Um I think that
is something that should be considered.
um because we do want to continue to
sanction the regime in Iran for the
repressive tactics that they're using
against their own people. It's not clear
beyond that
and beyond diplomacy what else the
administration and the US might be
thinking about. One concern that I have
is that we have some issues that have
been raised by Iran watchers who have
suggested that military action um
against the regime in Iran might produce
further backlash against demonstrators
and also might move demonstrators to be
more supportive of Iran. So the bombings
in the country I think should be very
carefully considered before military
action is taken.
>> Okay. But on tariffs um this idea of
there being a 25% tariff on goods coming
from countries that do business with
Iran. that would affect China primarily,
but it would also affect other Iranian
trading partners which are US allies
like the United Arab Emirates, like
Turkey.
>> It would.
>> And is that still the right thing to do?
>> Well, I think it's one of the things we
can consider as we're looking at how to
put pressure on the regime in Iran. And
I'm not particularly concerned about
what happens to China's trade if we put
a tariff on their trade to Iran. And I
also think for the UAE, um, certainly
happy to entertain the concerns and to
talk about
what what they might be willing to do to
better pressure the Ayatollah and the
government of Iran to stop attacking
their citizens. But on China, it would
be a big difference only a couple of
months on from the administration's
truce on trade with China, which means
it's a potential source of economic
instability. Is it still worth doing?
>> Well, I think the administration, as
we've heard from President Trump, often
um he makes statements without having a
lot of data and discussion to back them
up. So, it's not at all clear what he
might ultimately do. And certainly we
need to have an understanding with China
about trade in ways that don't just
benefit China but also address the US
concerns about how China is operating.
>> Can you let us into your world, Senator?
You have long experience on Capitol
Hill. You've represented the state of
New Hampshire for nearly 17 years in the
Senate. When someone as senior as you
has these open questions about US
policy, what do you do? Like is there an
open line to your Republican
counterparts or do you try and formally
or informally seek some kind of
understanding from the White House? How
does it work?
>> All of the above. You know, I talk to my
colleagues, both Democrat and
Republican. I raise concerns when we
have hearings or briefings. Um, I send
letters to the White House, to
administrative agencies. I try and talk
to officials in the administration when
I have concerns about policy decisions
that they've made. And I try and make
the case with reporters in the media
about when I disagree with actions of
the administration. And I did that not
just with this administration, but with
the Biden administration and with the
Obama administration.
>> Okay. But obviously it it's it's got to
be an easier relationship for you when
there's a Democrat in the White House.
>> Well, it's easier, but in some ways it
um it creates
more challenges when I criticize my own
president than when I criticize the
president of the other party. Help me
understand then as you look back on the
period just before this administration,
say the last year of the Biden
presidency, do you look back and think I
should have paid more attention or
spoken out about the way that President
Biden was appearing or how little he was
appearing in public? And and I could
have served my party better by being
more open on that situation, his health.
Well, I had a number of private
conversations with um White House staff,
with others around the president about
my concerns. Um if I had raised it
openly sooner, would that have made a
difference? Maybe. I don't know the
answer to that.
>> Have you thought about that a lot? I
mean, given what the last how dramatic
the last year in terms of the use of
executive power by President Trump has
been.
>> No, I've thought more about the
president's illegal use of executive
power. And do you have confidence that
the courts will start to act on that? I
mean, I'm talking about the highest
courts really. We've got their tariff
case coming up before the Supreme Court.
>> I don't know the answer to that. I'm not
an attorney and I'm I'm not an expert on
the Supreme Court. I can tell you that
there was a lot written after the oral
arguments about the AIPA tariffs as to
the con questions that were raised by
various Supreme Court justices that
suggested they have real questions about
whether those tariffs are legal. Um, but
how they will rule, we'll just have to
wait and see. But I wonder how alive you
are to people's disappointment, anger
even with how little Congress has been
able to do in this past year. There are
lots of Democrat voters, we can see it
in polls, who are deeply frustrated with
the lack of ability for Congress to to
act on the president's use of such
powers.
>> Oh, I certainly share that frustration.
I was part of a a mika brief with
respect to the tariff issue at the
Supreme Court helped to lead that. I
have legislation that would um constrain
the ability of the president to enact
those tariffs. But broader, I appreciate
the frustration and share it. I'll tell
you, I deal with it every day and we
think about every day what can we do to
address the policy decisions that this
administration is making. But what I say
to my Democratic friends is, boy, you
better get engaged. You better start
working. We've got midterm elections
coming up. We had local elections. If
you don't like what's going on in this
country, you need to get busy and get
working. And that's what our democracy
is about. You know, when I was in
graduate school, I had a professor who
used to talk about the fact that we have
a revolution in America every four
years. It's called the presidential
election. And for a lot of people, they
didn't pay a lot of attention. They
believed what Donald Trump said when he
was campaigning about his focus on
domestic issues, about his intent to
address cost of living and some of the
concerns that people had been
experiencing. And sadly, he hasn't done
that. So, I hope people are paying
attention and they're going to work
harder in this upcoming election for
alternatives.
>> And yet, you're still known, aren't you,
as one of the bipartisan-minded
lawmakers on Capitol Hill. You're not a
fire brand. You work with Republicans
when you want to, when you need to. And
I wonder then if you think that what
this moment calls for or 2028 calls for
the next presidential election, cuz you
won't be in the Senate, then you you're
stepping down. Is the candidate, the
presidential candidate that your party
needs, more like you prepared to work
across the aisle or more of the fire
brand, the Alexandria Okaziocortez or
the Zoran Mandani, although he can't run
for president?
>> Well, I think that's what the voters are
going to decide. Again, one of the great
aspects of our presidential selection
process for me has been the New
Hampshire primary. We were historically
the first um presidential primary of any
state in the country. We were the first
to allow uh direct vote on presidential
candidates. And it's been not only
fascinating, but I think really
important to the presidential selection
process to require candidates to engage
with voters when they're campaigning. So
that the candidate who may have the most
name recognition, be the best funded,
may have been involved the longest,
isn't necessarily the candidate that
when voters have a chance to talk to and
engage with think is the best person to
be president. And that's what the whole
presidential selection process is about.
And you know, my experience is that
voters in New Hampshire have really been
pretty effective. They picked Jimmy
Carter way back when he was running.
They picked John McCain when he was
running against George W. Bush. They
have been quite effective in engaging
with candidates and really asking the
tough questions and asking for answers
for what they would really do if they
became president. But you must have an
idea, a preference about the kind of
candidate that you'd like to see come to
the four in 2028.
>> Well, I'd like to see someone who has
executive experience. I think that's
very important to be able to run things.
I'd like to see somebody who shares my
values with the direction that the
country should be taking. And and I do
think it's important to have someone who
is able to talk to those people who
don't agree with them. You know, as
governor in New Hampshire, I had a
legislature that was Republican and I
figured out very early that if I was
going to get anything done, I had to
figure out how we could work together
and how we could compromise. And that's
the story of America. You know, America
is built on compromise. That's the way
Congress is supposed to work. And it's
unfortunate that what we've seen in the
last decades has been more and more
partisanship at a time when my
constituents in New Hampshire say to me,
"Why can't you guys just work together
to get things done?"
>> But if I may, Senator, I wonder if the
rules have completely been upended by
the last year, and the kind of model
you're talking about is an older model.
You know, you say the way to get things
done is compromise. It's not the way
Donald Trump gets things done. Far from
it. He doesn't talk to people who don't
agree with him.
>> Well, he does a little bit. He called
Elizabeth Warren yesterday, so he's
beginning to figure out that he better
talk to some of us because he's he's
getting in real trouble when it comes to
the American voters. So I do think while
he doesn't operate in the same way that
our presidents have operated
historically, I hope he's an aberration
because I don't think that his
leadership style is good for America.
So, do you detect broad signs that there
are more Republicans who really want him
to get back to affordability and cost of
living issues in these months leading up
to the midterms?
>> Well, we're seeing some signs. There was
a discharge petition in the House that
17 Republicans joined with Democrats to
say we need to extend the premium tax
credits for health insurance under the
Affordable Care Act. I think that was a
sign. We saw in the Senate last week
five Republicans break to vote for a war
powers resolution. Um that I think was a
surprise to the White House. So, we are
seeing some signs and we've seen a
number of people speak out about the
Justice Department's investigation of uh
the Federal Reserve Chairman J. Pal.
>> And they get threatened pretty quickly,
don't they, by the president. Um
especially if they're up for reelection
when when they do say things like that.
>> Well, they do, but it hasn't seemed to
deter them so far.
Speaking of the Affordable Care Act and
health insurance premiums and um tax
credits or subsidies, you were one of
the Democrats who helped bring the
federal government shutdown to an end a
couple of months ago when you worked on
a compromise with your Republican
colleagues and you were criticized for
that. Your own daughter, who's running
for a congressional seat herself, felt
that she couldn't support the position
you've taken. What did you actually get
out of that compromise given that we we
still don't have a deal on extending
those subsidies?
>> Well, we don't yet. I'm still hopeful
that we're going to be able to get
something done. We've had a working
group that's been meeting for about a
month now to see if we can't reach a
compromise and we're almost there. So,
I'm still hopeful that we can get
something done. And the reality is that
the government shutdown was putting at
real risk
so many Americans. There were about 50
million Americans who were directly
affected by the government shutdown. 42
million who had lost their food
assistance. Two million federal workers
who were missing their paychecks.
National Guardsmen, people who were in
what we call the WICK program to help
women, infants, and children get food,
who were in danger of losing their food
as well. So, it was important, I
believe, to get the government up and
running again and to address the premium
tax credits because what we heard from
our Republican colleagues was that they
were not going to do anything to address
those premium tax credits until the
government opened up. And we've been
meeting almost since the government
opened to address those premium tax
credits. And as I said, I'm hopeful that
we can get something done. But is it
possible that we have another shutdown?
It is possible, isn't it? We have
another shutdown at the end of this
month because there's another deadline
looming.
>> I'd be surprised
>> because you think you're going to get
there on the healthcare issue.
>> Well, because we are working on
appropriations bills to fund the
government. We have another package
coming over from the House that's
actually passed the House that's coming
over to the Senate this week. We have
another package of almost all of the
remaining bills. So we will have funded
almost all of the government by the end
of January. And so that addresses the
shutdown issue.
>> Tell me how it felt to be on the other
side of such a important and emotive
issue from your daughter.
>> How did you specifically feel about your
mother, but also the senior senator from
your state being part of this deal?
>> Look, you know, she did what she
believes is right, and I'm doing what I
believe is right. When I watched her
talking about why she felt differently
on bringing the shutdown to an end, she
put it in such personal terms when she
talked about her daughter, your
granddaughter Ellie, being diagnosed
with type 1 diabetes, a serious chronic
condition when she was only eight and
how it made your daughter Stephanie's
life completely different.
>> All of our lives different as a result.
>> Absolutely. I thought cuz of course
she's talking about your granddaughter
and I just wondered when you heard her
speak in those terms, how hard was it
for you to be on the opposite side of
such an important decision.
>> I applaud Stephanie's run for Congress.
She is an independent thinker. She is um
a hard worker. She understands the
health care system and so many other
challenges we face. And so I'm I want
her to do anything that's going to help
her get elected. But healthcare is so
personal, isn't it? I mean, people think
of it in terms of their own care, their
relatives care.
>> It is. That's why it was important to
make a stand on that issue. But we were
not going to be successful until we
opened the government up again. And we
had a lot of people who were really
experiencing real hardship. um whether
you're talking about air traffic
controllers and the chaos in our
airspace or those people who were going
without food because the f food
assistance was being cut off. So it was
important to get the government up and
running again so that we could then
address the premium tax credits and
that's what I'm hoping we will do.
>> How much did you talk about it or how
fraught were the discussions within the
family about it?
>> Not at all. You know, I've been involved
in politics for 50 years in New
Hampshire. My kids all grew up with my
involvement in politics. They understand
how those decisions are made and we were
very open about the reason I was taking
my position and the reason Stephanie was
taking hers.
>> How does it feel then about leaving
politics after all of this time? Will
you relish getting your life back or
will you feel like it's the end of your
public service for the people of New
Hampshire?
>> Well, I hope I'll be able to still
contribute. I I look forward to
continuing to work on foreign policy
issues, which is something I'm very
passionate about. I look forward to
continuing to contribute in New
Hampshire, to my community, and to the
state. And I hope everyone feels that
way. I spent some time as the director
at the Institute of Politics at the
Kennedy School of Government. It's one
of two memorials to John Kennedy um that
were created after his assassination.
And one of the things that I was always
impressed by was Kennedy's
very strong statement about the most
important role of Americans is that of
citizen. It's that of being a good
citizen, paying your taxes, voting,
engaging in your community, helping
others, and that doesn't end just
because you leave public office.
>> Ask not what your country can do for
you, but what you can do for your
country.
>> Well, that summarizes, and it's
something that John Kennedy talked about
on a number of occasions, and
particularly talked about with young
people. Before we let you go, Senator, I
wonder if you do have this sense then
that the torch needs to pass to a new
generation. I mean, it's also what
Kennedy said at his inauguration.
There's your daughter, of course, hoping
to begin her congressional career. I'm
also thinking you're stepping down, but
you've got quite a few high-profile
colleagues on Capitol Hill who serve for
much longer than you have and who aren't
willing to let the torch pass to a new
generation. Well, everyone has to make
their own decision about what's good for
them personally. For me, I thought it
was time. As you I said, I've been in
politics for 50 years. I've served in
elective office by the end of my term
for 30 years at both the local, state,
and federal level. And so it will be
nice to have a little more flexibility
in my schedule to be able to have a
little more time to to do the things
that I haven't had a chance to do
because of the demands of the job.
>> But will you leave office feeling that
America's place in the world is more
uncertain or more perilous than when you
entered the Senate in 2009?
>> I don't think we know the answer to that
yet.
What would you need to see to know the
answer to that in the next few months?
>> Well, I'd like to see the Democrats take
back the House. I'd like to see that
NATO has a very strong summit this
summer. I'd like to see continued work
with our allies and partners, and I will
do everything I can to try and make all
of that happen.
>> Senator Jean Shaheen, thank you for
talking to us.
>> Thank you.
>> [music]